---
layout: post
title:  "We can code it"
date:   2015-04-12 14:45
categories: equality
image: /assets/article_images/2015-04-12-we-can-code-it/we-can-code-it.png
---

Recently, I wrote a blog post for my friends' startup
[SuperHealos](https://superhealos.com/2015/03/we-can-code-it/) on empowerment.
I'm cross-posting it here.

I’m a software engineer working at a big tech company. Recently, we had a
workshop for a group of undergraduate female students interested in computer
science. I volunteered to mingle with them at a reception after the event to
share my experience. As an introvert, I prefer to avoid such social events, but
after learning that there were very few female engineers planning to attend, I
was concerned that these young women might feel discouraged and leave with the
impression that there were indeed not many female engineers .

At the reception, I was immediately surrounded by a few girls, all eager and
excited to learn more about computer science and software development. “So what
is it like to be a female software engineer?” asked a girl. “There aren’t that
many female software engineers, right?” echoed another. How I wish I could just
answer the question “what it is like to be a software engineer?”. How I wish we
could de-emphasize the word female. As a female engineer, I do the same work as
my male colleagues, and I face the same challenges.

But I also understand that this question is inevitable because it is a real
concern. A Harvard Business Review study from 2008 found that as many as 50% of
women working in science, engineering and technology will, over time, leave
because of the unwelcoming workplace environment. The LA Times recently
[interviewed](http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-women-tech-20150222-story.html)
a couple of female software engineers who quit their jobs because
of the unpleasant experience in the workplace. These were sad stories, and they
made me question how much innovation went unfulfilled because of these dynamics.

While we certainly need to pay close attention to these reports, I think we
should not ignore the positive experience some female engineers have because
they give us hope and optimism. My experience from school to work is quite
positive. I did my Bachelor’s degree in Computer Engineering at The University
of British Columbia in Canada and then my PhD in Computer Science at MIT. Last
July, I started my job as a software engineer working on live video streaming
systems. Even though I’m the only female in my team, I do not feel I’m treated
differently, and my contributions are always recognized. After finishing my
first project, my manager encouraged me to seek a promotion during the next
evaluation cycle, and gave me more impactful projects to work on. I recently
worked with a team member to analyze the latency of our system. I added code to
track and log the latency throughout the system, and he analyzed and generated
the report. Although the report was the more visible result, my manager made  it
a point to recognize my contributions. Overall, I feel I’m treated equally
regardless of my gender.

I believe that, in general, the experience of female engineers in the workplace
is improving. People are more aware of the gender related issues and realize
that it takes both men and women to improve the workplace culture.

Women in the tech industry have come a long way. There are trailblazers who
paved the way for us, and they are my heroines: Barbara Liskov, Grace Hopper,
Anita Borg, and many many other amazing female computer scientists and
engineers. We need more role models like these to empower the younger the
generation, and I strive to become one .

At the reception, the girls asked me a lot of good questions regarding software
development and testing. They know git, GitHub, Python, Java, C++. They want to
develop apps and code it. I came here trying to inspire them, but I was
surprised to be inspired by their enthusiasm. Some girls asked for my contact
because they thought my advice was useful and they wanted to learn more. It was
at that point, I felt that the power of encouragement and empowerment is
tangible.

I’m hopeful that, one day, asking what it is like to be a female software
engineer will sound as weird as asking what it is like to be a male software
engineer.
